---
title: An ode to the neo-grotesque web
date: 2023-09-18
slug: an-ode-to-the-neo-grotesque-web
aliases:
    - /zephyr/an_ode_to_the_neo_grotesque_web/
tags:
    - Essay
---

Every once in a while, I love browsing the Wayback Machine[^1] to catch a glimpse of the
early internet. I enjoy the waves of nostalgic indie hacker vibes that wash over me as I
type a URL into the search box and click to see an old snapshot of the site frozen in time.
Being a kid of the early '00s, I missed the spectacular cosmic genesis of the '90s internet
in its entire nascent glory. However, I did briefly get a coup d'œil of the raw, untainted
web 1.0 right before SEO firms, ads, pop-ups, modals, autoplays, and heavy frontend
frameworks started prowling and gentrifying the whole space into an anxiety-inducing
corporate circus.

Before social media and other corporate silos became mainstream, the web had, for the lack
of a better word, more character to it. From IRC rooms to personal blogs with weird
pixelated designs and sound effects, the realm was fragmented, chaotic, heterogeneous, and
mostly, a lot of fun. There were no best practices around doing anything, and the notion of
creativity wasn't tied to the craft of how many keywords or interactive animations you could
shove into a page to get the most eyeballs. You were the cool kid if you could just wire
together a few pages with Perl, PHP, Python, or even Bash, and put something useful out
there.

Now, I don't want to come across as one of those anachronistic hipster millennials, reeking
of RMS energy, who will reject anything that's even remotely modern. Neither am I under the
illusion that web 1.0 was a blissful nirvana, and we should've halted the progress wheel
there. I wouldn't want to relive the past of loading jQuery-heavy pages on my crappy 2G
mobile network or the security horrors of PHP CMSes. Also, I'd prefer not all the websites
to adopt the user-hostile-pitch-black-text-on-blinding-white design. It wouldn't be
functional, and the UX would probably drive away most folks.

But there's absolutely no denying that the raw, unfiltered chaos of the old web had a
magical spark to it that the sterile, framework-stuffed UIs of today often lack. While the
mighty legion of the framework overlords and their thousand minions seem unstoppable in
their quest to homogenize the web, it doesn't have to be this way everywhere. There are
still pockets where the web's wild spirit can run free, untouched by the unrelenting march
of frameworks stomping out all traces of creativity.

Whenever I see technology mughals like Peter Norvig or Rob Pike showcase their thoughts
through ancient relics like this[^2] or this[^3], it does put a smile on my face. No gaudy
animations, no fancy fonts, no dark mode—just strings of thoughts laid bare against a
backdrop of naked HTML. If you don't like the design, just load the content with Safari or
Firefox reader and you're golden. Of course, not all websites have to be like this but not
every website has to look like Stripe's[^4] either.

People often conflate this brutalist[^5] approach to designing websites with user-hostile,
overly minimalist, and lazy design. The opposite of UI maximalism doesn't need to be UX
belligerence. Your site can look like absolute poop but still be responsive on any device
and provide a great UX, like this absolutely hilarious rant page[^6]. It wraps perfectly on
your laptop, phone, or tablet, and doesn't need to load 2 MB static assets. Plus, who cares
about the layout when the content is this interesting?

The neo-grotesque web keeps the minimalist design of the brutalist philosophy while
maintaining a neat UX and emphasizing content rather than fluff. Bring back those
single-column personal blogs where writers would just list out a few heartfelt contents and
call it a day. Bring back those gigachad dynamic websites like Craigslist[^7] with their
unadorned buttons and blue URLs that, UI-wise, give those million-dollar react-y pages a run
for their money. As long as the pages wrap on your phone, what's there to complain about?
Ugly can still be beautiful. Excrement contains nutrients. All hail the neo-grotesque web!

[^1]: [Wayback machine](http://web.archive.org/)

[^2]: [Rob Pike's blog](https://commandcenter.blogspot.com/)

[^3]: [Peter Norvig's blog](https://www.norvig.com/)

[^4]: [Stripe website](https://stripe.com/)

[^5]:
    [Brutalism in web design](https://designlab.com/blog/examples-brutalism-in-web-design/)

[^6]: <https://motherfuckingwebsite.com/>

[^7]: [Craigslist](https://www.craigslist.org/about/sites)
