---
title: The diminishing half-life of knowledge
date: 2023-11-12
tags:
    - Essay
---

Ever been in a situation where you landed a software engineering job with a particular tech
stack, mastered it, switched to another company with a different stack, nailed that too, and
then found yourself in a third company that used the original stack? Now, you suddenly sense
that your hard-earned acumen in that initial stack has not only atrophied over the years but
also a portion, or all of it, has become irrelevant, making it a bit of a struggle to catch
up with the latest changes.

After graduation, I switched gears from electrical to software engineering. I started out as
a junior data scientist at an e-commerce startup. There, I juggled tasks like training
small-scale machine learning models, analyzing tabular data, and building visualizations
with the Python data stack. When COVID hit, I jumped ship to another company using a
different tech stack, shifting my attention to distributed system and backend engineering.

In my current role, I'm still mostly doing backend work, just with a different set of tools
than before. Throughout this journey, I've been fortunate enough to dart around three
different continents. While hopping between positions and tech stacks has definitely widened
my horizon, I've been grappling with the observation that as I pick up new skills, some of
the older ones depreciate at a faster pace. It's quite difficult to keep yourself sharp with
tools that you don't get to use regularly at work.

With all the hype around LLMs lately, I'm feeling drawn back to my original data science
roots. To rekindle that part of my brain, I've started dabbling in some of my old OSS work,
and to my great surprise, I'm struggling quite a bit to pick up the fundamentals and the
required mathematics since I've been out of the game for so long. While I've kept in touch
with some part of the open-source data world to stay relevant, apparently that wasn't
enough. On top of that, the world keeps piling on new concepts and skills that I'll need to
pick up if I ever intend to get past the interview barrier and professionally work in this
arena again.

Turns out this manifestation of stochastic knowledge decay is a well-studied phenomenon. The
term half-life of knowledge[^1] was coined in 1962 by economist Fritz Machlup[^2] to
represent the amount of time that has to elapse before half of the knowledge or facts in a
particular area is superseded or shown to be untrue. It's named after the half-life of decay
in radioactive materials. This article[^3] on the IEEE Spectrum dives deep into the concept
and reflects upon its effect on the industry. It postulates that the half-life of
engineering knowledge is shrinking faster than ever before and the only way to tackle this
is through continuous learning and getting better at managing the onslaught of information.

I don't have a prescriptive solution for this. I wrote this text to start a discussion
around a feeling I previously struggled with but didn't know how to label. So far, engaging
with the OSS community on topics I find exciting, taking meticulous notes, tracking my
learning progress, adopting boring technology, and writing about them have helped me stay
relevant. However, this approach isn't bulletproof and is quite susceptible to lack of
motivation at the tail end of a 40-hour workweek. If you've experienced something similar
and found a solution that worked for you to some extent, I'd love to hear about it!

[^1]: [Half-life of knowledge](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Half-life_of_knowledge)
[^2]: [Fritz Machlup](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fritz_Machlup)
[^3]:
    [Half-life of knowledge pressures employers to seek out young engineers](https://spectrum.ieee.org/an-engineering-career-only-a-young-persons-game)
