---
title: Einstellung effect
date: 2024-02-24
tags:
    - Meta
---

In 9th grade, when I first learned about Lenz's Law in Physics class, I was fascinated by
its implications. It states:

> _The direction of an induced current will always oppose the motion causing it._

In simpler terms, imagine you have a hoop and a magnet. If you move the magnet close to the
hoop, the hoop generates a magnetic field that pushes the magnet away. Conversely, if you
pull the magnet away, the hoop creates a magnetic field that pulls it back. This occurs
because the hoop aims to prevent any change in the surrounding magnetic field. That's Lenz's
Law: the hoop consistently acts to maintain the magnetic field's status quo, reacting
against the motion that initiated the change.

In my experience, is how knowledge works as well. The very thing that made you good at what
you do often prevents you from getting better.

The first decent program I ever wrote was a simulation in MATLAB during my sophomore year.
Since then, I've switched career gears a few times and picked up a few programming languages
along the way. The weird thing is, over the years, learning new paradigms hasn't become any
easier than I thought it'd be. I only got better at grokking technologies that are woefully
similar to what I already know.

Sure, picking up a new tool or library in a familiar language has become second nature, but
so has the tendency to keep doing the same thing I'm somewhat good at, slightly differently,
and falling into the false lull of growth. This can be perilous in the sense that, unless
you actively fight it, after a decade, you might find yourself in a situation where you
actually have only one year's worth of experience repeated 10 times.

I've been looking for a phrase to label the situation where the curse of knowledge,
accumulated over time, prevents you from acquiring new knowledge and adopting new ways of
thinking. Turns out, there's one for that—the Einstellung effect[^1]. Einstellung is a
German word for "attitude" or "setting." It describes a situation where we stick to a
familiar way of thinking or solving problems, which can stop us from seeing or seeking
easier or better solutions. This only gets worse as we start growing older and becoming more
experienced in a narrow slice of a highly specialized domain.

To put it more concretely, when I learned my first proper programming language, Python, it
was much easier for me to pick up the syntax, semantics, and the culture around it since all
that knowledge was basically getting dumped into an empty slate. When I had to pick up some
JavaScript for work, it was still relatively easy since I started to compare the features of
the language with the one I knew and worked my way up. However, the time it took for me to
get comfortable in the JS world wasn't that shorter since I was begrudgingly resisting
learning about the warts of the language and complaining about how nice Python's type system
was compared to this mess!

It was only when I started to learn Go that I became aware of the warts of Python and when
it just isn't the right tool to solve the problem at hand. Despite Go's fame for being
simple, I had to read a few books, solve a few koans, and build a few tools before I got
confident in solving problems with it. One reason why it took longer is because I was trying
to emulate Python idioms inside Go while at the same time bashing people who write Go like
Java, completely being oblivious to my own stance.

It's natural for us to acquire new skills by mapping them with what we actually know, and
that's true for any skill—whether it's learning to cook a new dish or write in an unfamiliar
programming language. But at the same time, as we grow older, we actively need to strain
against the tide to learn to learn like kids. Because without it, we're nothing but
simulacra wasting the gift of consciousness, spellbound by the allure of mimicry!

[^1]: [Einstellung effect](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Einstellung_effect)
